docs/20251203/implementation_specs/regularizer_adrs/adrs/ADR-005_entropy.md, before:

# ADR-005: Entropy Regularizer

## Status

Proposed

## Context

Entropy measures the uncertainty or "spread" of a probability distribution. In language model fine-tuning, entropy regularization serves two opposing purposes:

1. **Entropy maximization** - encourages diverse, uncertain outputs (exploration)
2. **Entropy minimization** - encourages confident, peaked outputs (exploitation)

The choice depends on the task:
- Creative generation benefits from higher entropy
- Classification/factual tasks benefit from lower entropy (confidence)
- RLHF often uses entropy bonus to prevent mode collapse

## Decision

Implement `Tinkex.Regularizer.Entropy` with configurable direction (maximize or minimize).

### Interface

```elixir
defmodule Tinkex.Regularizer.Entropy do
  @behaviour Tinkex.Regularizer

  @moduledoc """
  Entropy regularizer for controlling output distribution uncertainty.

  H(P) = -Σ P(x) * log(P(x))

  ## Modes

  - `:maximize` (default) - adds entropy as reward, encourages diversity
  - `:minimize` - subtracts entropy, encourages confidence

  ## Example

      # Encourage diverse outputs
      %RegularizerSpec{
        fn: &Entropy.compute/3,
        weight: 0.01,
        name: "entropy_bonus",
        opts: [mode: :maximize]
      }

      # Encourage confident outputs
      %RegularizerSpec{
        fn: &Entropy.compute/3,
        weight: 0.01,
        name: "entropy_penalty",
        opts: [mode: :minimize]
      }
  """

  @impl true
  def compute(_data, logprobs, opts \\ []) do
    mode = Keyword.get(opts, :mode, :maximize)
    normalize = Keyword.get(opts, :normalize, false)

    # H = -Σ p * log(p) = -Σ exp(logp) * logp
    p = Nx.exp(logprobs)
    entropy_pointwise = Nx.negate(Nx.multiply(p, logprobs))

    # Sum over vocabulary dimension (last axis)
    entropy_per_position = Nx.sum(entropy_pointwise, axes: [-1])

    # Optionally normalize by max entropy (log of vocab size)
    entropy_per_position =
      if normalize do
        vocab_size = Nx.axis_size(logprobs, -1)
        max_entropy = :math.log(vocab_size)
        Nx.divide(entropy_per_position, max_entropy)
      else
        entropy_per_position
      end

    # Mean over batch/sequence
    mean_entropy = Nx.mean(entropy_per_position)

    # Apply direction: maximize returns negative (to minimize loss)
    loss = case mode do
      :maximize -> Nx.negate(mean_entropy)  # Reward high entropy
      :minimize -> mean_entropy              # Penalize high entropy
    end

    {loss, %{
      "entropy_mean" => Nx.to_number(mean_entropy),
      "entropy_min" => Nx.to_number(Nx.reduce_min(entropy_per_position)),
      "entropy_max" => Nx.to_number(Nx.reduce_max(entropy_per_position)),
      "mode" => Atom.to_string(mode)
    }}
  end

  @impl true
  def name, do: "entropy"
end
```

### Configuration Options

| Option | Type | Default | Description |
|--------|------|---------|-------------|
| `:mode` | `:maximize` \| `:minimize` | `:maximize` | Direction of regularization |
| `:normalize` | boolean | `false` | Normalize by max possible entropy |
| `:temperature` | float | `1.0` | Apply temperature before computing entropy |

## Consequences

### Positive

- Simple, well-understood information-theoretic measure
- Directly controls output diversity/confidence tradeoff
- Prevents mode collapse when maximizing
- Encourages calibration when minimizing
- Normalized mode allows comparison across vocab sizes

### Negative

- Choosing direction requires understanding task requirements
- Entropy maximization can hurt task performance if overdone
- Doesn't directly measure output quality

### Neutral

- Returns statistics for monitoring entropy during training
- Normalization is optional but aids interpretability

## Implementation Notes

### Entropy Interpretation

| Entropy Level | Meaning | Normalized (32k vocab) |
|---------------|---------|------------------------|
| 0 | Deterministic (one token) | 0.0 |
| 2.3 | ~10 equally likely tokens | ~0.22 |
| 4.6 | ~100 equally likely tokens | ~0.44 |
| 10.4 | Max (uniform over 32k) | 1.0 |

### Numerical Stability

When p ≈ 0, p * log(p) → 0 (L'Hôpital's rule). Nx handles this correctly, but we can add explicit safety:

```elixir
# Clip logprobs to prevent -inf * 0 = NaN
logprobs_safe = Nx.clip(logprobs, -100, 0)
```

### Temperature Scaling

Optional temperature parameter adjusts distribution sharpness before entropy computation:

```elixir
if temperature != 1.0 do
  logprobs = Nx.divide(logprobs, temperature)
  # Re-normalize with log_softmax
  logprobs = Nx.subtract(logprobs, Nx.logsumexp(logprobs, axes: [-1], keep_axes: true))
end
```

### Relationship to RLHF

In Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), entropy bonus is standard:

```
Loss = -reward + β * KL_penalty - γ * entropy_bonus
```

This regularizer provides the entropy bonus term. Combined with ADR-004 (KL Divergence), you can implement PPO-style objectives.

### Typical Weight Range

| Weight | Effect | Use Case |
|--------|--------|----------|
| 0.001 | Very light | Minor diversity encouragement |
| 0.01 | Moderate | Standard entropy bonus |
| 0.1 | Strong | Aggressive exploration |
| 1.0+ | Dominant | Entropy becomes primary objective |

## Alternatives Considered

### 1. Conditional Entropy
H(Y|X) for sequence models. More complex, requires positional awareness. Could be future ADR.

### 2. Mutual Information
I(X;Y) = H(X) - H(X|Y). Requires paired distributions. Out of scope.

### 3. Rényi Entropy
Generalization with parameter α. More flexible but less common. Could add if needed.

### 4. Top-k Entropy
Only compute entropy over top-k tokens. Reduces noise from low-probability tokens.

```elixir
# Potential enhancement
topk_logprobs = Nx.top_k(logprobs, k: 100)
# Compute entropy only over these
```

## References

- Shannon (1948). "A Mathematical Theory of Communication"
- Williams & Peng (1991). "Function Optimization using Connectionist Reinforcement Learning Algorithms" (entropy bonus in RL)
- Mnih et al. (2016). "Asynchronous Methods for Deep Reinforcement Learning" (A3C entropy term)

Commit message:

feat: Default penalty lambda to 1.0 for unscaled primitives
Updates L1, L2, and Elastic Net penalties to default `:lambda` to `1.0` instead of `0.01`.

This enforces the design principle that pipeline weights are the primary scaling knob for regularization strength, aligning primitives with an "unscaled" default.

Key changes:
- Updated default `:lambda` in all penalty definitions to `1.0`.
- Added documentation clarifying that primitives default to unscaled (`lambda: 1.0`) and pipeline `:weight` should be used for overall regularization control.
- Introduced `NxPenalties.GradientTracker` module to compute per-penalty and total gradient norms, integrated optionally into `NxPenalties.compute/3` via `:track_grad_norms`. This fulfills the design goal established in ADR-009.

This commit also updates documentation files to reflect the new default values and API options.

docs/20251203/implementation_specs/regularizer_adrs/adrs/ADR-005_entropy.md, after:

# ADR-005: Entropy Regularizer

## Status

Proposed

## Context

Entropy measures the uncertainty or "spread" of a probability distribution. In language model fine-tuning, entropy regularization serves two opposing purposes:

1. **Entropy maximization** - encourages diverse, uncertain outputs (exploration)
2. **Entropy minimization** - encourages confident, peaked outputs (exploitation)

The choice depends on the task:
- Creative generation benefits from higher entropy
- Classification/factual tasks benefit from lower entropy (confidence)
- RLHF often uses entropy bonus to prevent mode collapse

## Decision

Implement `Tinkex.Regularizer.Entropy` with configurable direction (maximize or minimize).

### Interface

```elixir
defmodule Tinkex.Regularizer.Entropy do
  @behaviour Tinkex.Regularizer

  @moduledoc """
  Entropy regularizer for controlling output distribution uncertainty.

  H(P) = -Σ P(x) * log(P(x))

  ## Modes

  - `:maximize` (default) - adds entropy as reward, encourages diversity
  - `:minimize` - subtracts entropy, encourages confidence

  ## Example

      # Encourage diverse outputs
      %RegularizerSpec{
        fn: &Entropy.compute/3,
        weight: 0.01,
        name: "entropy_bonus",
        opts: [mode: :maximize]
      }

      # Encourage confident outputs
      %RegularizerSpec{
        fn: &Entropy.compute/3,
        weight: 0.01,
        name: "entropy_penalty",
        opts: [mode: :minimize]
      }
  """

  @impl true
  def compute(_data, logprobs, opts \\ []) do
    mode = Keyword.get(opts, :mode, :maximize)
    normalize = Keyword.get(opts, :normalize, false)

    # H = -Σ p * log(p) = -Σ exp(logp) * logp
    p = Nx.exp(logprobs)
    entropy_pointwise = Nx.negate(Nx.multiply(p, logprobs))

    # Sum over vocabulary dimension (last axis)
    entropy_per_position = Nx.sum(entropy_pointwise, axes: [-1])

    # Optionally normalize by max entropy (log of vocab size)
    entropy_per_position =
      if normalize do
        vocab_size = Nx.axis_size(logprobs, -1)
        max_entropy = :math.log(vocab_size)
        Nx.divide(entropy_per_position, max_entropy)
      else
        entropy_per_position
      end

    # Mean over batch/sequence
    mean_entropy = Nx.mean(entropy_per_position)

    # Apply direction: maximize returns negative (to minimize loss)
    loss = case mode do
      :maximize -> Nx.negate(mean_entropy)  # Reward high entropy
      :minimize -> mean_entropy              # Penalize high entropy
    end

    {loss, %{
      "entropy_mean" => Nx.to_number(mean_entropy),
      "entropy_min" => Nx.to_number(Nx.reduce_min(entropy_per_position)),
      "entropy_max" => Nx.to_number(Nx.reduce_max(entropy_per_position)),
      "mode" => Atom.to_string(mode)
    }}
  end

  @impl true
  def name, do: "entropy"
end
```

### Configuration Options

| Option | Type | Default | Description |
|--------|------|---------|-------------|
| `:mode` | `:maximize` \| `:minimize` | `:maximize` | Direction of regularization |
| `:normalize` | boolean | `false` | Normalize by max possible entropy |

> **Future extension:** `:temperature` for distribution sharpening is documented below but not yet implemented in `compute/3`.

## Consequences

### Positive

- Simple, well-understood information-theoretic measure
- Directly controls output diversity/confidence tradeoff
- Prevents mode collapse when maximizing
- Encourages calibration when minimizing
- Normalized mode allows comparison across vocab sizes

### Negative

- Choosing direction requires understanding task requirements
- Entropy maximization can hurt task performance if overdone
- Doesn't directly measure output quality

### Neutral

- Returns statistics for monitoring entropy during training
- Normalization is optional but aids interpretability

## Implementation Notes

### Entropy Interpretation

| Entropy Level | Meaning | Normalized (32k vocab) |
|---------------|---------|------------------------|
| 0 | Deterministic (one token) | 0.0 |
| 2.3 | ~10 equally likely tokens | ~0.22 |
| 4.6 | ~100 equally likely tokens | ~0.44 |
| 10.4 | Max (uniform over 32k) | 1.0 |

### Numerical Stability

When p ≈ 0, p * log(p) → 0 (L'Hôpital's rule). Nx handles this correctly, but we can add explicit safety:

```elixir
# Clip logprobs to prevent -inf * 0 = NaN
logprobs_safe = Nx.clip(logprobs, -100, 0)
```

### Temperature Scaling

Optional temperature parameter adjusts distribution sharpness before entropy computation:

```elixir
if temperature != 1.0 do
  logprobs = Nx.divide(logprobs, temperature)
  # Re-normalize with log_softmax
  logprobs = Nx.subtract(logprobs, Nx.logsumexp(logprobs, axes: [-1], keep_axes: true))
end
```

### Relationship to RLHF

In Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), entropy bonus is standard:

```
Loss = -reward + β * KL_penalty - γ * entropy_bonus
```

This regularizer provides the entropy bonus term. Combined with ADR-004 (KL Divergence), you can implement PPO-style objectives.

### Typical Weight Range

| Weight | Effect | Use Case |
|--------|--------|----------|
| 0.001 | Very light | Minor diversity encouragement |
| 0.01 | Moderate | Standard entropy bonus |
| 0.1 | Strong | Aggressive exploration |
| 1.0+ | Dominant | Entropy becomes primary objective |

## Alternatives Considered

### 1. Conditional Entropy
H(Y|X) for sequence models. More complex, requires positional awareness. Could be future ADR.

### 2. Mutual Information
I(X;Y) = H(X) - H(X|Y). Requires paired distributions. Out of scope.

### 3. Rényi Entropy
Generalization with parameter α. More flexible but less common. Could add if needed.

### 4. Top-k Entropy
Only compute entropy over top-k tokens. Reduces noise from low-probability tokens.

```elixir
# Potential enhancement
topk_logprobs = Nx.top_k(logprobs, k: 100)
# Compute entropy only over these
```

## References

- Shannon (1948). "A Mathematical Theory of Communication"
- Williams & Peng (1991). "Function Optimization using Connectionist Reinforcement Learning Algorithms" (entropy bonus in RL)
- Mnih et al. (2016). "Asynchronous Methods for Deep Reinforcement Learning" (A3C entropy term)
