docs/20251203/implementation_specs/regularizer_adrs/README.md, before:

# Regularizer ADRs

Architecture Decision Records for additional regularizers in Tinkex.

## Context

The `Tinkex.Regularizer` behaviour provides a composable pipeline for adding penalty terms to the training loss. This ADR set documents proposed regularizers for the library.

## ADR Index

| ADR | Title | Status | Priority |
|-----|-------|--------|----------|
| [ADR-001](adrs/ADR-001_l1_sparsity.md) | L1 Sparsity Regularizer | Proposed | High |
| [ADR-002](adrs/ADR-002_l2_weight_decay.md) | L2 Weight Decay Regularizer | Proposed | High |
| [ADR-003](adrs/ADR-003_elastic_net.md) | Elastic Net Regularizer | Proposed | Medium |
| [ADR-004](adrs/ADR-004_kl_divergence.md) | KL Divergence Regularizer | Proposed | High |
| [ADR-005](adrs/ADR-005_entropy.md) | Entropy Regularizer | Proposed | Medium |
| [ADR-006](adrs/ADR-006_consistency.md) | Consistency Regularizer | Proposed | Medium |
| [ADR-007](adrs/ADR-007_gradient_penalty.md) | Gradient Penalty Regularizer | Proposed | Low |
| [ADR-008](adrs/ADR-008_orthogonality.md) | Orthogonality Regularizer | Proposed | Medium |

## Regularizer Categories

### Norm-Based (ADR-001, ADR-002, ADR-003)
Classical regularizers that penalize parameter magnitudes. Prevent overfitting by constraining model capacity.

### Distribution-Based (ADR-004, ADR-005)
Regularizers that operate on output distributions. Useful for keeping fine-tuned models close to base models or controlling prediction confidence.

### Stability-Based (ADR-006, ADR-007)
Regularizers that encourage consistent or smooth model behavior. Improve generalization and robustness.

### Structure-Based (ADR-008)
Regularizers that enforce structural properties on learned representations. Particularly relevant for LoRA fine-tuning.

## Implementation Priority

### Phase 1 (Core)
- L1, L2, KL Divergence - fundamental regularizers used in most training scenarios

### Phase 2 (Extended)
- Elastic Net, Entropy, Orthogonality - common but more specialized use cases

### Phase 3 (Advanced)
- Consistency, Gradient Penalty - advanced techniques for specific scenarios

## Common Interface

All regularizers implement the `Tinkex.Regularizer` behaviour:

```elixir
@callback compute(
  data :: list(Datum.t()),
  logprobs :: Nx.Tensor.t(),
  opts :: keyword()
) :: {Nx.Tensor.t(), %{String.t() => number()}}

@callback name() :: String.t()
```

## Usage Pattern

```elixir
alias Tinkex.Regularizer.{L1, L2, KLDivergence}
alias Tinkex.Types.RegularizerSpec

specs = [
  %RegularizerSpec{fn: &L1.compute/3, weight: 0.001, name: "l1"},
  %RegularizerSpec{fn: &L2.compute/3, weight: 0.01, name: "l2"},
  %RegularizerSpec{fn: &KLDivergence.compute/3, weight: 0.1, name: "kl_div"}
]

{:ok, outputs} = Tinkex.Regularizer.Executor.execute_all(specs, data, logprobs, [])
```

Commit message:

feat: Default penalty lambda to 1.0 for unscaled primitives
Updates L1, L2, and Elastic Net penalties to default `:lambda` to `1.0` instead of `0.01`.

This enforces the design principle that pipeline weights are the primary scaling knob for regularization strength, aligning primitives with an "unscaled" default.

Key changes:
- Updated default `:lambda` in all penalty definitions to `1.0`.
- Added documentation clarifying that primitives default to unscaled (`lambda: 1.0`) and pipeline `:weight` should be used for overall regularization control.
- Introduced `NxPenalties.GradientTracker` module to compute per-penalty and total gradient norms, integrated optionally into `NxPenalties.compute/3` via `:track_grad_norms`. This fulfills the design goal established in ADR-009.

This commit also updates documentation files to reflect the new default values and API options.

docs/20251203/implementation_specs/regularizer_adrs/README.md, after:

# Regularizer ADRs

Architecture Decision Records for regularization penalties.

> **Historical Context:** These ADRs were originally written for a `Tinkex.Regularizer` behaviour as part of the [tinkex](https://github.com/North-Shore-AI/tinkex) library. They are preserved here as design background showing the evolution of NxPenalties. The module names (`Tinkex.Regularizer.*`) are historical and do not reflect the NxPenalties public API.
>
> **Current Implementation:** See the sibling `implementation_specs/` directory for the actual NxPenalties API design, which uses `NxPenalties.Penalties.*`, `NxPenalties.Divergences.*`, etc.

## Context

These ADRs document the design decisions for regularization penalties. The math and concepts apply directly to NxPenalties, while the Tinkex-specific integration code (behaviours, Datum structs) is handled separately in tinkex.

## ADR Index

| ADR | Title | Status | Priority |
|-----|-------|--------|----------|
| [ADR-001](adrs/ADR-001_l1_sparsity.md) | L1 Sparsity Regularizer | Proposed | High (v0.1) |
| [ADR-002](adrs/ADR-002_l2_weight_decay.md) | L2 Weight Decay Regularizer | Proposed | High (v0.1) |
| [ADR-003](adrs/ADR-003_elastic_net.md) | Elastic Net Regularizer | Proposed | Medium (v0.1) |
| [ADR-004](adrs/ADR-004_kl_divergence.md) | KL Divergence Regularizer | Proposed | High (v0.1) |
| [ADR-005](adrs/ADR-005_entropy.md) | Entropy Regularizer | Proposed | Medium (v0.1) |
| [ADR-006](adrs/ADR-006_consistency.md) | Consistency Regularizer | Proposed | Medium (v0.1) |
| [ADR-007](adrs/ADR-007_gradient_penalty.md) | Gradient Penalty Regularizer | **Advanced** | Low (v0.2) |
| [ADR-008](adrs/ADR-008_orthogonality.md) | Orthogonality Regularizer | Proposed | Medium (v0.1) |
| [ADR-009](adrs/ADR-009_gradient_tracking.md) | Gradient Tracking | Proposed | Medium (v0.1) |

## Regularizer Categories

### Norm-Based (ADR-001, ADR-002, ADR-003)
Classical regularizers that penalize parameter magnitudes. Prevent overfitting by constraining model capacity.

### Distribution-Based (ADR-004, ADR-005)
Regularizers that operate on output distributions. Useful for keeping fine-tuned models close to base models or controlling prediction confidence.

### Stability-Based (ADR-006, ADR-007)
Regularizers that encourage consistent or smooth model behavior. Improve generalization and robustness.

### Structure-Based (ADR-008)
Regularizers that enforce structural properties on learned representations. Particularly relevant for LoRA fine-tuning.

### Infrastructure (ADR-009)
Supporting functionality for monitoring and debugging regularizer behavior during training.

## Implementation Priority

### Phase 1 (Core)
- L1, L2, KL Divergence - fundamental regularizers used in most training scenarios

### Phase 2 (Extended)
- Elastic Net, Entropy, Orthogonality - common but more specialized use cases

### Phase 3 (Advanced)
- Consistency, Gradient Penalty - advanced techniques for specific scenarios

## Common Interface

All regularizers implement the `Tinkex.Regularizer` behaviour:

```elixir
@callback compute(
  data :: list(Datum.t()),
  logprobs :: Nx.Tensor.t(),
  opts :: keyword()
) :: {Nx.Tensor.t(), %{String.t() => number()}}

@callback name() :: String.t()
```

## Usage Pattern

```elixir
alias Tinkex.Regularizer.{L1, L2, KLDivergence}
alias Tinkex.Types.RegularizerSpec

specs = [
  %RegularizerSpec{fn: &L1.compute/3, weight: 0.001, name: "l1"},
  %RegularizerSpec{fn: &L2.compute/3, weight: 0.01, name: "l2"},
  %RegularizerSpec{fn: &KLDivergence.compute/3, weight: 0.1, name: "kl_div"}
]

{:ok, outputs} = Tinkex.Regularizer.Executor.execute_all(specs, data, logprobs, [])
```
